Source : A seminar on Concurrent and Synchronization

Concurrent Process ?

Two processes are concurrent when they are executed in a way that their execution intervals overlap.

	-----------                                    ---------------
	     -----------						-------------------
	There is concurrency				There is no concurrency

What's difference between concurrency and parallelism ?
	Concurrency 				Parallelism
1.running and managing multiple			
computation at the same time is 
concurrency

						for parallelism, we need multiple processors
Adobe and samsung ask this ques.... :p

Advantages of Concurrency .:
1. Running of multiple applications
2. Better Resource utilization
3. Better avg response time
4. Better performance


Kinds of Concurrent process
	1. Independent Process: Execution of one process does not affects the execution of other processes.
	2. Cooperative Process: Execution of one process affects the execution of other processes.


Interaction among processes
	1. Access to shared resources
		#processes sharing a resource
		#processes access a resource
		#Eg- printer

	2.Communication
		#process exchanging information
		#eg - Messenger

	3.Synchronization
		#A process must wait for an event in another process
		#eg- IRCTC ticket booking (wait for transaction then only ticket will be booked)

Issues of Concurrency - 
	1.Non Atomic
		Operations that are non atomic but interruptible by multiple processes can cause problem
		(atomic processes - which can't be broken down - any process which is independent of anyother process
		non atomic process - can be subdivided)
		1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 processes are running , 3 4 5 6 7 are concurrent , so if a concurrent process is interruptible 
		then entire task will be affected.

	2.Race Condition
		learn it yourself

	3.Blocking
		Processes can block waiting for resources. A process could be blocked for long period of time waiting for input from a terminal
		If the process is required to periodically update some data, this would be very undesirable.

	4. Starvation
		It occurs when a process doesnot obtain service to progress
	
	5. Deadlock
		It occurs when two processes are blocked and hence niether can proceed to execute.































