file:///D:/Desktop/Preparation/OS/6-004-spring-2017/6-004-spring-2017/contents/c19/c19s1/index.htm



The problem of deadlock is elegantly illustrated by the Dining Philosophers problem. Here there are, say, 5 philosophers waiting to eat. Each requires two chopsticks in order to proceed, and there are 5 chopsticks on the table.

The philosophers follow a simple algorithm. First they pick up the chopstick on their left, then the chopstick on their right. When they have both chopsticks they eat until they’re done, at which point they return both chopsticks to the table, perhaps enabling one of their neighbors to pick them up and begin eating. Again, we see the basic setup of needing two (or more) resources before the task can complete.

Hopefully you can see the problem that may arise...

If all philosophers pick up the chopstick on their left, then all the chopsticks have been acquired, and none of the philosophers will be able to acquire their second chopstick and eat. Another deadlock!

Here are the conditions required for a deadlock:

1. Mutual exclusion, where a particular resource can only be acquired by one process at a time.

2. Hold-and-wait, where a process holds allocated resources while waiting to acquire the next resource.

3. No preemption, where a resource cannot be removed from the process which acquired it. Resources are only released after the process has completed its transaction.

4. Circular wait, where resources needed by one process are held by another, and vice versa.

How can we solve the problem of deadlocks when acquiring multiple resources? Either we avoid the problem to begin with, or we detect that deadlock has occurred and implement a recovery strategy. Both techniques are used in practice


In the Dining Philosophers problem, deadlock can be avoided with a small modification to the algorithm. We start by assigning a unique number to each chopstick to establish a global ordering of all the resources, then rewrite the code to acquire resources using the global ordering to determine which resource to acquire first, which second, and so on.

With the chopsticks numbered, the philosophers pick up the lowest-numbered chopstick from either their left or right. Then they pick up the other, higher-numbered chopstick, eat, and then return the chopsticks to the table.

How does this avoid deadlock? Deadlock happens when all the chopsticks have been picked up but no philosopher can eat. If all the chopsticks have been picked up, that means some philosopher has picked up the highest-numbered chopstick and so must have earlier picked up the lower-numbered chopstick on his other side. So that philosopher can eat then return both chopsticks to the table, breaking the hold-and-wait cycle.

So if all the processes in the system can agree upon a global ordering for the resources they require, then acquire them in order, there will be no possibility of a deadlock caused by a hold-and-wait cycle.

